## Public crypto networks as financial market infrastructures

U. Bindseil, O. Malekan 1

## 14 February 2025

The design of financial instruments and processes has always been contingent on the infrastructure such products live on. Blockchain technology, as utilized by public crypto networks such as Ethereum, represents a novel type of payment and settlement infrastructure that gives rise to a new generation of solutions. We discuss the properties of this technology such as immediacy, omni-asset capability, programmability,  and  ability  to  flatten  the  financial  architecture  (disintermediation).  We  provide examples of the unique products they enable, some of which might disrupt today's dominant payment and capital market solutions in the future. We discuss the utility of blockchain technology in private (permissioned) networks. Finally, we revisit the risks of public crypto networks and their mitigants.

JEL: G20, E42

Key words: market infrastructures; blockchain, settlement. efficiency

## 1. Introduction

Financial processes have always been tied to infrastructure. From bills of exchange to mobile banking, economic participants have relied on technology and have thought to innovate over time to achieve greater  efficiency.  Often,  financial  infrastructure  has  tended  towards  continuity-that  is,  running uninterrupted  around  the  clock-and  immediacy,  achieving  the  desired  outcome  -  typically  the ultimate transfer of money and/or assets right away. In a previous paper (Bindseil and Malekan, 2024), we considered the impact of information and communication technology (ICT) on the time structures of  financial  instruments,  payments  and  settlement,  and  argued  that  technology  seemed  to  push finance  towards  a  frictionless  model  with  universal  immediacy  and  continuity.  Our  focus  was  on established technology with higher computing power and modern communication methods such as the internet. Our analysis also showed that technology can only do so much to improve finance. At a certain point, the core architecture of financial interaction must also evolve, if for no other reason than to properly take advantage of what the latest technology has to offer.

This paper focuses on the radically different architecture of blockchain technology and public crypto networks. After describing their unique properties, we argue that put together, they can enable time structures  and  novel  financial  products  that  cannot  exist  in  traditional  financial  architecture.  The specific features described are streaming payments, omni-asset settlement, programmability, and full disintermediation.  We  also  contemplate  the  utility  of  (mostly  hypothetical)  private  blockchain networks operated by existing intermediaries, then give prominent examples of the decentralized alternatives already live on public networks, some which have significant usage. We also consider the limitations of such solutions.

## 2. The time structure of DeFi

Crypto  networks  take  an  entirely  different  approach  to  time  structure  compared  to  the  current financial  system.  Their  unique  design  also  emanates  from  the  fact  that  they  were  invented  only recently, to serve a modern economy where widespread access to computers and the internet was a given, and to serve a global user base. They have no 'tech debt' dating back to the analog era. Put differently, many existing payment and settlement systems were designed around a lack of today's ICT,  and  had  to  contend  with  spatial  constraints,  such  as  the  need  to  deliver  paper  checks  or certificates,  or  even  human  ones,  such  as  the  slowness  of  manual  processing.  And  while  the technology of financial services has evolved, the core architecture remains the same. This is partially due to the difficulty of upgrading important infrastructure but also driven by incentive incompatibility. There is no technical reason why wholesale central bank payment systems can't operate on weekends, or why the regular session for equity market trading can't be extended further, but either change would require expensive overhauls for most participants and eliminate revenue streams for some.

Crypto  networks were  designed  for  an  economy  that  practically  demands  global  access  and  24/7 immediacy. As a result, most have little to do with traditional time structures and are only loosely connected to calendars and clocks. Each crypto network has its own cadence, with the minimum interval  for  settlement  represented  by  the  frequency  of  the  next  block.  Blocks  are  batches  of transactions that are inserted into an immutable ledger by miners or validators. Depending on the protocol, block creation can be stochastic or deterministic.

The Bitcoin blockchain targets ten-minute block times, but actual results are exponentially distributed and  dependent  on  several  factors,  including  the  total  amount  of  mining  (Nakamoto,  2008).  The protocol monitors network activity retroactively and adjusts the difficulty of extending the chain every 2016 blocks, which roughly translates to every two weeks. Actual block times can vary from a few seconds to over an hour, but these so-called 'difficulty' adjustments maintain the 10-minute average over time. Note that all other adjustments, such as the periodic reduction of the coin's inflation rate, also happen based on the passage of blocks, as opposed to time. Bitcoin has probabilistic finality of settlement (Lewis-Pye &amp; Roughgarten, 2023), so the point at which a transaction can be considered 'settled' is a matter of convention. But given the current high level of mining activity-translating to a  high  cost  of  attack-network  participants  generally  treat  the  passage  of  a  few  blocks  as  final settlement.

Newer crypto networks have faster block times and predictive finality. Ethereum has a fixed block time  of  12  seconds  and  the  maximum  time  to  irreversible  settlement  for  any  transaction  is  12.8 minutes (Ethereum Foundation, 2023). Other blockchains, such as Solana,  offer  sub-second  block times  and  faster  finality.   All  of  these  networks  can  be  considered  real-time  gross  settled  (RTGS) 2 systems  for  both  payments  and  capital  market  activity,  but  there  are  several  caveats  to  this classification. The timing of transaction processing is never guaranteed, as inclusion of any particular transaction in the next block is dependent on several factors, including network congestion and how much in fees the transactor is willing to pay. The process mirrors that of a continuous auction without an auctioneer, as described by Huberman et al:

'The Bitcoin protocol indirectly entails a priority auction, although no auctioneer is present. Users with higher waiting costs pay higher transaction fees and wait less. Users' bids have the VCG property that each user bids an amount equal to the externality he imposes on others by delaying their transactions'

Unlike many traditional settlement systems, fees are independent of the amount being transacted, but  could vary  based on  the  complexity  of  the transaction. They  can  be  volatile  and  spike  during periods of congestion, crowding out low-value activity. That said, crypto networks are open to the public  and  don't  distinguish  between  wholesale  or  retail  activity.  They  also  operate  continuously around the clock, and mature networks like Bitcoin and Ethereum offer effectively 100% uptime.

## 3. Streaming payments

The  global  nature  of  crypto  networks  and  their  continuous  operation  makes  them  suitable  for payments-in  any  currency.  Except  for  Bitcoin,  most  crypto  networks  are  designed  to  handle  an infinite variety of assets inside a single settlement system. Networks such as Ethereum and Solana allow users to issue and transfer arbitrary stores of value called tokens, extending their settlement service to other assets beyond their native currencies (which are still needed to cover transaction fees). What any one token actually represents depends on contractual obligations (on and off the blockchain) and social convention. Token values are determined by the market but could also be anchored by a convertibility promise, including for an asset that lives off chain.

One of the most popular applications of this functionality is to central bank issued currencies, primarily the  dollar.  These  so-called  'stablecoins'  which  are  privately  issued  and  typically  backed  by  liquid assets denominated in the same currency (e.g. Treasury bills), are issued on various crypto networks by Fintech-like firms that commit to maintaining convertibility at par by backing each on-chain token with an off-chain reserve, likely consisting of cash and cash equivalents in the unit of account. As of Jan 2025, there are close to $200b worth of such tokens on various blockchains, making their issuers among the largest private holders of U.S. Treasuries . These instruments, which were initially invented 3 to serve the needs of crypto speculators and serve as on and off ramps for crypto exchanges, are increasingly  used  as  dollar  proxies  for  savings  and  payments.  Stablecoin  payments  volumes  are estimated to have been greater than $5T in 2024  (Carter 2024). 4

Users who trust the convertibility of stablecoins can use them to make payments-of any kind. Unlike traditional  payments  systems,  which  are  often  customized  for  specific  types  of  payments  such  as wholesale, retail, B2B, merchant, and so on, stablecoins utilize the neutral nature of public crypto networks to meet a variety of needs. The main limiting factor is the time structure of the underlying blockchain,  leading  to  segmentation.  For  example,  due  to  its  relatively  slower  block  cadence  and higher  fees,  Ethereum  is  more  likely  to  be  used  for  high-value  transfers  that  don't  need  instant settlement. The Tron blockchain and Solana are preferred for smaller payments. As of November 2024,  the  median  transfer  amount  in  the  USDC  stablecoin  on  Solana  was  $20,  versus  $1400  on Ethereum (Ved &amp; Cabieses 2024).

The  crypto  industry  is  evolving  to  offer  faster  and  cheaper  settlement,  either  by  improving  the infrastructure  of  a  single  network  or  by  creating  a  modular  system  where  lower-value  transfers happen  on  'Layer-2'  solutions  that  settle  periodically  on  a  chain  like  Ethereum.  Regardless  of approach, there is a likely end state where stablecoin payments can become instant, continuous, and quasi cost- free. That is, the point at which the transaction cost is so low that it becomes negligible. Unlike traditional payment providers in the private sector, crypto networks don't have a profit margin per se. Fees are only needed to prevent spam transactions and to compensate the validators that secure the network. The decentralized nature of these networks means that the holdup problem and related abuse of market power that are the potential end state of privately-owned payment systems do not apply.

In the future, payments on advanced crypto networks could act like streaming money, in the same way that online  media  consists  of  streaming  data.  Fractional  units  of  any  currency,  including  fiat money, could be streamed from sender to recipient. While such payments are theoretically possible on existing electronic payment platforms, they are seldom economic given the fee structure, which often includes a minimum per-transaction fee. Even if they were, the ability for the intermediary in charge of the network to throttle or block users arbitrarily-possibly for compliance with AML/CFT regulations-raises  a  question  of  reliability.  In  crypto,  the  censorship-resistant  and  decentralized nature of the underlying infrastructure provides additional assurances to users and entrepreneurs. This frees the latter up to invent new solutions or business models that were previously not possible.

## 4. Omni-Asset infrastructure and conditional transfers

Most traditional payment and settlement systems were invented for a single currency or specific set of securities. They also began as regional solutions that were eventually expanded to serve national or even international needs, like in the case of the international central security depositories, or ICSDs. What is often described as 'the financial system' is in reality a complicated web of interconnected clearing and transfer networks, tied together by hub-and-spoke like intermediaries. Interoperability is a challenge during the best of times and can be a point of systemic risk during crises.

Crypto networks take a different starting point. Their token functionality turns them into omni-asset infrastructure,  something that  traditional  capital markets  did  not  really  consider.  Most  traditional settlement systems are only used for a single asset (e.g., Fedwire for wholesale dollar payments) or a category of similar assets (e.g., NSCC for U.S. equities), or one pair of asset types (T2S for securities and  euro  payments).  Bindseil  and  Malekan  (2024)  describe  how  many  rely  on  batching  and  net settlement to achieve scale. This fragmentation is mostly a byproduct of their analogue roots but has become entrenched. On a purely technological basis, there is no reason to settle different assets on different networks, as all such assets are database entries, and all settlement is credits and debits per the rules of a protocol. While true that different assets require different standards and messaging conventions, these differences need not be addressed at the core settlement layer. But in reality, there are many practical, legal, regulatory, and even geopolitical reasons why different assets settle on different infrastructure. There is also little incentive for incumbents who enjoy a dominant market position  on  some  asset  or  currency  to  desire  greater  integration.  Many  derive  profits  from fragmentation.

Settling  different  types  of  assets  on  the  same  global  network  has  multiple  benefits.  For  example, market  participants  using  different  currencies  need  not  wait  on  multiple  central-bank  run  RTGS systems  with  different  operating  hours.  Omni-asset  infrastructure  brings  down  costs,  reduces complexity, and diminishes settlement risk, such as Herstatt Risk .  It enables new time structures by 5 facilitating atomic settlement (also known as delivery-vs-payment or payment-vs-payment) between any asset and another. In traditional finance, products that require interaction with more than one settlement system must utilize each sequentially, so final settlement can only occur as quickly as the slowest  component.  For  example,  a  foreign  securities  purchase  with  an  FX  leg  must  wait  for  the currency leg to complete before the security leg can be settled-there is no way to parallelize the effort. There are exceptions, such as the T2S platform, which was specifically set up to achieve DvP in an integrated manner and with settlement in central bank money, by encompassing securities and central  bank money in one system, but this too is a limited solution by crypto standards. Lack of commonality in settlement systems leads to frictions such as derivative markets that can only settle when their spot markets are open, ETFs that have diminished liquidity when the markets for their components are closed, and securities transactions that get held up by a payment. Indeed, one of the obstacles  to  moving  securities  markets  to  faster  settlement  is  the  bottleneck  of  cross-border payments for international investors.

Crypto  networks  don't  distinguish  between  different  assets,  so  a  token  representing  an  options contract can exist on the same network as the numeraire it trades against (e.g., USD) and the spot asset  it  settles  against  (e.g.,  a  security).  Crypto  networks  can  also  order  multiple  transactions

sequentially and execute them within the same block, introducing a novel form of predictability. For example, the entire lifecycle of a secured loan-including the temporary transfer of collateral-can be completed intraday, intra hour, or even intra minute.

## 5. Smart contracts and programmability

The execution of such instruments is facilitated by 'smart contracts', conditional payments whose execution is carried out by the miners or validators that secure a network. Smart contracts are not the blockchain equivalent of legal contracts (Malekan 2022). They are programmed conditions that are triggered either by users, other transactions inside the blockchain, or outside catalysts. They can be as  simple  or  as  complex  as  any  other  kind  of  code,  and  their  outcomes  are  cryptographically guaranteed. Platforms such as Ethereum and Solana have their own virtual machines and execute code written in specific programming languages. Smart contracts that execute inside a decentralized virtual machine and act on tokens are a powerful financial tool. They simultaneously allow greater flexibility  in  financial  product  design  and  more  predictable  outcomes.  Put  differently,  they  allow financial activities of inordinate complexity to be executed with perfect reliability. In crypto, a single transaction might involve 100 different legs, all executed at the same time.

One example of a novel financial product (and time structure) that only such an infrastructure could offer is a flash loan . Flash loans are uncollateralized loans that are taken out and repaid in the same 6 transaction, giving new meaning to the notion of immediacy. They are useful for short term activities like arbitrage. They work by requiring borrowers to submit a list of the specific activities that they will conduct with the borrowed funds, the final step of which is repayment. Paradoxically, the loan is only granted if the smart contract offering it can be 100% certain of repayment. This type of certainty might seem impossible but is in fact how computers work. Even the most primitive calculator always returns the same value when put through the same arithmetic. Crypto networks can also be thought of as calculators that move money.

Programmability can also be used to facilitate interaction between different financial solutions that operate on the same crypto network. For example, a decentralized lending solution can call upon a decentralized trading one whenever it needs to liquidate a loan. This is both an acceleration and expansion of the features facilitated by the use of APIs mentioned in our first paper. The industry term for this phenomenon is 'composability,' colloquially referred to as money or financial Legos in the crypto industry (Kitziler et al, 2023). Composability means that the output of any one smart contract (or integrated system of smart contracts) can be used as the input for any other. The existing financial system is already reliant on automation and interoperability, but both features are more useful on settlement systems that run continuously and are designed to be censorship resistant. A traditional securities exchange can always turn off its API or ban specific counterparties, so interoperability is only as strong as the legal arrangements between counterparties (the same holds true for centralized crypto exchanges, such as Coinbase). A smart contract cannot censor or be turned off unless such a feature is explicitly programmed in.

## 6 Disintermediation

Traditional  settlement  systems  often  distinguish  between  wholesale  and  retail  users  to  achieve efficiency.  This  layering  is  observed  throughout  the  system  due  to  four  factors:  (i)  Markets  have frictions  that  can  be  overcome  with  intermediation;  (ii)  tiering  allows  for  specialization  into intermediaries  who  serve  end  clients  versus  those  who  facilitate  other  intermediaries;  (iii)  legacy designs  that  are  not  optimized  for  modern  IT  capabilities  (iv)  Legislation  that  prioritized  system stability over technological optimization.

In  Bindseil  and  Malekan  (2024)  we  reviewed  how  one  of  the  biggest  efficiencies  introduced  by intermediation is the practice of deferred net-settlement (DNS) where end-user activity is batched, netted down, and settled periodically. DNS is beneficial to end users only to the extent that it makes the intermediaries that serve them more efficient. But deferred net settlement comes with delays and potential risks, or costs to mitigate these risks (such as collateralisation of exposures to settlement risk). For example, ACH payments, which are popular for payroll disbursements, often batch on a T+1 or T+2 basis.

There is no need for batching in a theoretically frictionless market where all participants can interact in  peer-to-peer  fashion  and  pay  or  settle  instantly.  Indeed,  in  such  a  market  any  deferring  of settlement leads to greater counterparty risk and participants having to delay other economic activity until final settlement. There are of course several benefits to batching and delayed net settlement.

The inherent credit relationships that arise as IOUs wax and wane up until final settlement makes it easier for different participants to extend credit to each other, reducing the overall cost of capital. For example,  a  clearinghouse  executing  DNS  can  easily  extend  intra-settlement  credit  to  wholesale participants, who in turn can extend that credit to end clients, such as market makers. There are usually limits to this practice as enforced by margin requirements, but credit can nevertheless be extended  without  having  to  source  outside  capital.  The  downside  to  this  approach  is  greater counterparty risk. At worst, the clearinghouse itself is at risk of failure during a crisis. The margin requirements often imposed to diminish that risk can cause other disruptions, as it did in the memestock event discussed in our first paper.

RTGS systems are more explicit in credit provisioning, and there is plenty of leverage in DeFi. But funding for it must come from an outside source beyond the settlement infrastructure. This increases the overall cost of capital but makes the system more resilient. Leverage in DeFi is easier to detect than a clearing system that relies on DNS.

A theoretical peer-to-peer market could only exist for bearer instruments-registered assets require some level of intermediation by the registrar-and bearer assets have historically had physical form, implying friction and risks. Overcoming that friction was one reason finance moved on from bearer instruments to an IOU-economy and to the rise of ledgers (Bindseil and Malekan 2024). Thus, the presence of friction in almost every kind of financial activity gives rise to intermediation, and most intermediaries enjoy both operational and capital efficiency when settlement is deferred, batched, and netted-often for the benefit also of end-users. That efficiency in turn allows intermediaries to better serve their clients. But it can also lead to concentration, implied market power, technological stagnation, and systemic risk.

Crypto networks are structurally different. The assets that they enable aim at being digital bearer instruments that combine the benefits of physical tokens, such as privacy and instant settlement, with the  efficiency  of  ledger-based  transfers.  In  theory,  these  networks  also  grant  access  to  the  most

important  infrastructure  to  anyone,  but  in  practice  access  is  auctioned  to  the  highest  bidder,  as capacity is limited and transactions are processed in order of the fee being offered by the a user. That user  could  still  be  a  regulated  intermediary,  or  it  could  be  a  large  user  willing  to  pay  for  priority processing. Most crypto networks are designed to be incapable of distinguishing between different types of users to preserve decentralization. This inability leads to less intermediation and more peerto-peer activity, and greater immediacy to those who desire it most-at least economically. Peer to peer activity is visible through the DeFi economy, enabled by the novel feature of all crypto assets being digital bearer instruments. The lack of registration (outside the blockchain ledger used to track everything) means tokens-like banknotes or certificates-can be transferred from any holder to any other, with digitization allowing for frictionless transfer and near-instant settlement.

To be fair, the financial benefits of intermediation go beyond settlement. Intermediaries help solve the coincidence problem-not every lender has a ready borrower, or buyer a willing seller. They also pool capital, an important function for lending and liquidity provisioning. They also provide expertise, allocate  credit  in  an  efficient  way,  and  facilitate  participation  of  less  sophisticated  individuals  to financial markets in a safe way.  In DeFi activities where the pooling of assets is desirable, such as trading  at  a  decentralized  exchange  or  borrowing  from  a  decentralization  lending  solution,  smart contracts play the role of a pooling intermediary.

Crypto  networks  allow  snippets  of  code  to  hold  assets  in  escrow  and  transfer  them  whenever  a predetermined condition is triggered. This approach is not without its downsides, because software bugs and vulnerabilities could be catastrophic, particularly when combined with the bearer nature of most  tokens,  and  the  unstoppable  continuity  of  the  underlying  network  (see  section  10).  Any decentralized finance solution where code escrows a large sum of assets is a honeypot for attackers. That said,  pooled  capital that  doesn't  involve  an  intermediary  (in the  traditional  sense)  is  a  novel phenomenon in finance. It allows for scale and efficiency without the associated fees, delays, holdup problem, and counterparty risks that pooling usually entails.

Ceteris  paribus,  fewer  intermediaries  mean  faster  settlement  times-assuming  the  underling infrastructure can handle the volume. On a blockchain like Ethereum, any user with a wallet balance can send a near real-time payment to any other user, around the clock and across the world. This is in contrast to existing cross-border payments, which are often a coordination challenge among a sending institution, recipient bank, and correspondent bank. Some of this challenge can be solved without migrating  to  new  technology,  but  there  are  challenges  of  governance  and  market  inertia..  Such payments can only settle as quickly as the slowest intermediary. They are also difficult to track. On public crypto networks, buyers and sellers, or lenders and borrowers, can interact directly with code that is always running. The process eliminates the need for some of today's brokers, exchanges, banks, and  clearinghouses.  Fewer  intermediaries  means  less  coordination,  and  by  extension,  faster settlement. It also means greater transparency.

Disintermediation should also allow for lower transaction costs. Payment and settlement systems enjoy  strong  network  externalities.  Networks  that  are  owned  by  private  actors  monetize  their dominant position with fees that can be significantly higher than their operating costs (Rosenbaum et al, 2017). Layer-1 decentralized blockchains only have a security framework, not a business model.

All of that said, today's crypto networks have several orders of magnitude less capacity than traditional payment systems, and there is an ongoing debate on how to scale them. One solution is to move smaller value transfers to the aforementioned secondary layers that process them faster and at lower cost, while granting users a continuous ability to withdraw their net assets back to the base layer. Such solutions  inherit  some  of  the  security,  decentralization,  and  real-time  guarantees  of  the  base

blockchain but not all, granting users more options on which features they desire and which they can do without.

The most prominent Bitcoin layer-2 solution is the Lightning Network. It has been live for years but failed to achieve significant adoption due to technical limitations and high cost of capital. Newer layer2 solutions for Bitcoin are expected to launch in the future. Ethereum has fully embraced the layered scaling approach and now has dozens of such solutions, colloquially known as 'rollups' or L2s. As of Jan 2025, the most successful Ethereum L2 by dollar value of assets is Arbitrum. The most successful in terms of transaction activity and fees paid is Base . 7

Upon first glance, the tiered scaling approach resembles the types of intermediation that is common in traditional finance. Layer-2 operators, known in the industry as sequencers , perform a type of batch processing and give users the right to withdraw their assets net of all activity to the main chain. Users can transfer assets from the main blockchain to a rollup by locking them in a bridge smart contract, one  that  continuously  receives  a  summary  of  activity  and  related  cryptographic  proofs  from  the sequencer.

But  unlike  traditional  clearinghouses  or  settlement  agents,  a  properly  designed  Layer-2  does  not operate as principal or agent. Users retain the private keys that allow them to transact and withdraw their assets. Crypto layer-2s are more like one type of code-based straight-through processing sitting on top of another-provided they optimize for decentralization. It's also worth noting that crypto users can always decide which layer they transact on, so long as they are willing to pay the associated fees. Traditional settlement systems restrict access to the most important infrastructure to regulated intermediaries providing wholesale services.

## 7. Permissioned blockchains

Another way to scale a blockchain is by restricting the set of validators who maintain the network to a small group of known entities. Such 'permissioned' networks can offer greater capacity than their open and 'permissionless' counterparts, like Bitcoin or Ethereum (Monrat et al, 2020). They can offer greater privacy and, due to their restrictive nature, are easier to regulate under frameworks designed for licensed intermediaries. Permissioned blockchains do not need their own cryptocurrency and have simpler  consensus  mechanisms.  Proponents  believe  that  they  offer  the  best  of  both  worlds:  the benefits of tokenization, smart contracts, and composability, without the technical complexity, low capacity, and resulting disintermediation of public crypto networks.

Many firms have explored the benefits of permissioned blockchains over the years. Permissioned blockchains have been deployed for supply chain tracking , intrabank settlement , and luxury good 8 9 authentication 10 . The now aborted Libra (later named Diem) stablecoin project spearheaded by Meta proposed a permissioned chain that would slowly evolve to become permissionless (Amsden et al,

2020). There have also been numerous pilots by central banks such as Project Helvetia 11 by the Swiss National Bank and Project Dunbar 12 by a consortium of Asian and African central banks.

The literature  accompanying such projects-most of which have yet to leave the proof-of-concept stage-espouse the benefits of tokenization. One example is the 'Unified Ledger' proposed 13 by the Bank  for  International  Settlement,  an  ambitious  project  whose  vision  echoes  the  possibilities discussed in this paper.

Through programmability and the platform's ability to bundle transactions ("composability"), a unified ledger  allows  sequences  of  financial  transactions  to  be  automated  and  seamlessly  integrated.  This reduces the need for manual interventions and reconciliations that arise from the traditional separation of  messaging,  clearing  and  settlement,  thereby  eliminating  delays  and  uncertainty.  The  ledger  also supports  simultaneous  and  instantaneous  settlement,  reducing  settlement  times  and  credit  risks. Settlement in central bank money ensures the singleness of money and payment finality.

The BIS proposal is the latest one in a series of similar ideas emanating from the private sector or public institutions, such as the Utility Settlement Coin, 14 the Regulated Liability Network, 15 and Global Layer  1. 16 All  aim  to  improve  payments  and  settlement  by  eliminating  some  intermediaries  and empowering others. Most use blockchain as wholesale infrastructure-public access can only come via regulated  intermediaries.  The  BIS  proposal  utilizes  central  bank  digital  currencies  (CBDCs),  the integration of which the authors argue is needed for the most secure type of atomic settlement. But there is no technical reason why a CBDC can't be issued on a public crypto network. A central bank if  comfortable  with  the  risks  discussed  in  section  9  -  could  also  issue  a  cash-like  claim  against  its balance sheet on Ethereum as it could on a permissioned 'unified' ledger managed by the BIS, with the former having the added benefit of being live and battle tested. Tokens issued on public crypto networks can still be programmed to restrict access.

Furthermore, despite a decade of exploration, it remains to be seen if any permissioned network could live up to its promise. Most have never left the pilot stage, and the few prominent ones that went into production (such as Tradelense by IBM and Maersk 17 ) have since shut down. The Australian Stock Exchange spent years and over $100m building a private blockchain to update its back-end settlement system, only to give up 18 . J.P Morgan claims that its internal private blockchain has already handled significant  volumes,  but  it  could  be  argued  that  a  blockchain  operated  by  a  single  bank  is  not necessarily an efficient database set up, i.e. that the same functionality could have been achieved more efficiently in a centralised single ledger.

One drawback of any permissioned ledger is the need to codify important external considerations such as participation, ownership, and control. Sorting out the details of 'who owns and controls what' among major stakeholders is challenging. Another drawback (and in some situations advantage) is the lack of platform neutrality. A permissioned system could always be halted, reversed, or shut down. It can also de-permission members or censor their transactions. These capabilities could be considered

to call into question the settlement assurances of the network (and they remind of the importance of settlement finality). It might be argued that a blockchain that can be turned off or reverted is little more than a complicated database with a lot of cryptographic bloat it does not need.

Public networks don't have this problem. Ethereum cannot be halted or reversed without the consent of the vast majority of network participants-an unlikely outcome given its large and global user base. The property rights of tokenized assets on a public network are directly tied to the fact that nobody is in charge. A permissioned network's inability to offer similar assurances partially defeats the point of deploying this complex and otherwise limited technology in the first place. The property rights of assets that live on a private network are only as strong as the contractual agreements and regulatory mandates of its operators.

## 8. Notable examples

The most successful crypto network to date is Bitcoin, at least as measured by the total market value of its native (and only) asset. The cryptocurrency surged to a new all-time high in 2024 and surpassed a  market  value  of  $1.7T.  Its  blockchain  settled  over  one  trillion  dollars'  worth  of  bitcoins  in  each calendar  month  of  2024,  whereby  most  of  this  was  speculative  in-and  outflows  for  investment purposes (i.e. not driven by payments). 19 While small compared to developed-economy RTGS systems, the  Bitcoin  blockchain  is  exceptional  in  several  ways.  Unlike  most  RTGS  systems,  it  operates continuously and can be accessed by anyone. It has also never experienced an outage or made a mistake.  The  drawbacks  of  Bitcoin  and  of  its  perception  of  an  investment  asset  are  discussed  in Bindseil, Papsdorf and Schaaf (2022) and Bindseil and Schaaf (2024).

Token and smart contract platforms such as Ethereum and Solana also operate around the clock. Despite having lower prominence than Bitcoin, both networks often settle greater value than Bitcoin. They also generate more revenues from transaction fees for their validators. 20 Their smart contract functionality and ability to process transactions for an unlimited number of assets can generate high fees during periods of high demand. Today, virtually all notable decentralized finance activity (beyond simple transfers) take place on networks other than Bitcoin.

The most prominent DeFi application on Ethereum is a decentralized exchange known as Uniswap. It uses a novel automated market maker to price trades based on a constant-product function (Adams et al 2020). Users who want to play the role of a liquidity provider (makers) submit tokenised assets in pairs to smart contracts for pooling. Other users who would like to swap one asset for another (takers) solicit quotes from smart contracts that price the trade based on the proportional amount of liquidity it would drain from one side of the pool. All swaps are atomic and ultimately processed by network validators. Uniswap also offers a router that finds the most cost-effective way of processing a trade, possibly by routing it across several different pools (for different pairs). A simple swap of one crypto asset for another might involve 4 other assets, all swapped instantly and atomically. Such a trade is not possible in traditional markets as they tend to be single asset (e.g., equities) and currency (e.g., euros).

Uniswap has processed $2.5T in cumulative trade volume as of Q4 2024. There are tens of thousands of  unique  trading  pairs 21 ,  and  anyone  can  create  a  new  pair  without  permission.  Decentralized exchanges that use an automated market maker are popular throughout crypto due to a diminished computational load for processing trades and the fact that long tail assets could still have liquidity (Milionis et al, 2022). Like its underlying infrastructure, Uniswap runs continuously around the clock. And unlike off-chain cryptocurrency exchanges such as Coinbase or the now-defunct FTX, users do not have to surrender custody of their assets to a third party to participate in trading. It is therefore a 'non-custodial' exchange.

Other DeFi applications such as Aave and Kamino facilitate lending and borrowing. Users who want to earn interest on their tokens submit them to smart contracts that hold them in pools. Other users who would like to borrow assets can remove them from the pool, but must first provide some kind of collateral.  DeFi  lending  is  almost  entirely  overcollateralized,  due  to  a  lack  of  reputation  for pseudonymous users and an inability to seek recourse for defaults inside the legal system. Interest rates are determined by smart contracts using a bonding curve and fluctuate based on supply and demand.

Unlike most traditional banks or credit solutions, DeFi lending protocols run around the clock-both for the issuance of a loan, voluntary closure, or involuntary liquidation if one becomes undercollateralized. Interest accrues in real-time and is calculated on a per-block basis. Some have minimum loan sizes, but some don't-due to automation, the marginal cost of every new loan is zero. Aave also offers the flash loan functionality mentioned earlier. Flash loans don't require collateral because repayment is guaranteed, otherwise the loan is not issued.

Another popular activity in DeFi is the use of futures-like derivates for levered betting on the price of different crypto assets. The most popular format for such products is the perpetual futures contract, colloquially referred to as 'perps.' Unlike traditional futures contracts, these products never expire. They instead use variable funding rates charged to long and short-side traders to force the derivative to  follow  the  price  of  its  respective  spot  market.  While  short  term  dislocations  can  happen,  perp contracts should eventually find their way back to the spot market as traders on the wrong side of a position pay increasingly more to maintain their position.

Perpetual  futures  are  also  popular  products  at  centralized  crypto  exchanges.  Indeed,  there  is  no fundamental reason why such products should only be popular for crypto assets or need to exist on a blockchain. Compared to traditional futures contracts, their primary benefits are the elimination of periodic settlement and the fragmentation of liquidity that results.

All of these DeFi solutions can be found on different smart-contract and token enabled blockchains, either as an extension of the same solution or in the form of a similarly designed competitor. Due to its age, maturity, and perceived level of decentralization, Ethereum is currently preferred for highvalue DeFi activity. There is over $65b in assets (as of Jan 2025) managed by its various decentralized finance solution. Solana is a distant second with $12b 22 . Solana's faster settlement times and lower fees are offset by a history of network downtime. That said, Ethereum's modular approach to scaling the  network  has  led  to  fragmentation  across  multiple  interrelated  blockchains,  diminishing  the opportunity for atomic settlement.

Today, the vast majority of activity in DeFi serves the needs of crypto speculators. There is very little activity that is a substitute for financial activity that empowers the broader economy. This is likely to change  as  the  infrastructure  matures  and  new  laws  and  regulations  pave  the  way  for  more institutional  adoption.  That  adoption  is  likely  to  be  uneven,  given  different  regional  needs  and regulatory frameworks. But markets have a long history of migrating to infrastructure that is more inclusive, transparent, stable, and open to innovation. Thus DeFi is likely to attract more non-crypto activity in the future.

## 9. Risks of DeFi networks and mitigants

Public crypto networks and the decentralized applications that operate on top of them have unique risks. Helpful categorizations and discussion of risks of DeFi networks are  from the Basel Committee on  Banking  Supervision  (2024)  and  from  the  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market  Infrastructure (2024; section 4), the latter focusing on tokenization. Risks are broken down into legal risks, network governance, technology risk, illicit activity, and settlement risk.

Legal risks arise if it is uncertain whether the legal status of the token is consistent with the status of the asset when not in tokenised form, which matters in particular in cases of default or insolvency. Legal  issues  may  be  particularly  unclear  in  the  context  of  cross-border  transactions,  since  ideally holders of assets have a clear, enforceable legal basis for all operations in all relevant jurisdictions. In a crypto network, the direct owner of an asset can be resident anywhere in the world, which is not the case in traditional finance. Another issue is the unclear intersection of the bearer or partiallybearer nature of crypto assets and the legal status of any asset in most jurisdictions. Possession might be '9/10 th of the law' as the old expression says, but of course the point of property rights is to protect the exceptions. Public crypto networks provide strong cryptographic guarantees of ownership ('not your keys, not your coin') but the utility of such a fundamentalist approach is not always clear. For example,  what  happens  if  the  private  key  of  the  largest  owner  of  tokenized  equity  for  a  large corporation is compromised, and their shares are stolen? Should the company now recognize the thief as the rightful owner?

Governance can be uniquely challenging for any decentralized solution where executive authority is lacking. Users of DeFi solutions on public crypto networks arguably face two layers of this risk, as both the application itself and the network it operates on likely have some kind of governance. Application governance is often conducted via a 'governance token' that allows owners to vote on key decisions. This design is vulnerable to low voter turnout, collusion among large holders, and bribery. Governance for  a  layer-1  blockchain  often  happens  informally  and  requires  off-chain  coordination  among  a dispersed set of ecosystem participants. The process can be chaotic, particularly in an emergency. Layer-2 networks are more varied in design and range from a single corporation controlling everything to token-based voting.

Arguably  the  best  mitigation  for  governance  risk  is  to  build  decentralized  applications  that  are governance-minimized, as is the case for Uniswap. A mature crypto network might eventually reach a state where it has 'ossified' and is both stable and unlikely to change, requiring minimal governance. Beyond that, the industry will have to iterate on more effective governance models.

Technologically , DeFi solutions are vulnerable to code bugs, exploits, and the challenges of providing off-chain  data  to  smart  contracts,  known  colloquially  as  'the  oracle  problem.'  The  partial  bearer

nature of crypto assets and the real-time settlement of most transactions, make DeFi a perpetual target for hackers. The public and censorship-resistant nature of the infrastructure makes it difficult to  filter  out  bad  actors.  Lastly,  the  decentralized  nature  of  application  governance  diminishes  the ability for a project to respond once a breach has begun. The cumulative user loss from such issues is estimated to be greater than $3b 23 . While all real-time gross-settled solutions are vulnerable to lost funds from mistakes or breaches, the issue is more acute in DeFi because the surface area of attack is larger.  That  said,  the  code  of  any  DeFi  solution  could  be  formally  verified  to  eliminate  bugs  and vulnerabilities. Projects can give out bug bounties to have others test their software, and there is a growing ecosystem of smart contract audit firms. The largest DeFi solutions on Ethereum have not experienced a major breach in years, despite having tens of billions of dollars in user assets.

The crypto networks on top of which these solutions are built are also vulnerable to issues of uptime and consensus failures. Proof of work consensus, as deployed by Bitcoin, is vulnerable to settlement reversion if a single miner controls more than 51% of the network. Proof of stake, as used by most other networks, is also vulnerable to majority control of the stake. Additionally, a PoS validator that controls more than a third of the amount staked can delay finalization. None of these exploits have ever happened on a major chain however, and the parabolic rise of Bitcoin mining and the price of coins used in staking make such attacks very expensive. Nuzzi et al (2024) estimate the cost of a onehour attack against Bitcoin at $20b and the cost of preventing finalization of Ethereum at over $40b.

Public crypto networks don't offer any kind of error or exception handling - doing so would violate the desire for decentralization and neutrality. This design might be desirable for native crypto assets like Bitcoin,  but  unrealistic  for  other  digital  assets.  Indeed,  most  stablecoin  issuers  already  have mechanisms to freeze, confiscate or destroy tokens-the fact that tokens only represent a claim on an off-chain reserve make this ability easy to implement. But there is no set standard on how this power  should  be  exercised,  and  creating  one  is  more  of  a  legal  and  regulatory  issue  than  a technological one. The Basel Committee on banking supervision defines in this context a standard according to which 'All rights, obligations and interests arising from the crypto-asset arrangement are clearly defined and legally enforceable in all the jurisdictions where the asset is issued and redeemed. In  addition,  the  applicable  legal  framework(s)  ensure(s)  settlement  finality  in  both  primary  and secondary markets.' 24

Ownership enforced through cryptographic keys also poses challenges for institutions. Many are not allowed to custody their own assets for regulator reasons. Even if they were, an institution like a pension  fund  can't  simply  hold  assets  via  a  single  key.  Institutions  generally  require  full  or  semicustodial  services  that  help  them  manage  access,  succession,  maker-checker  operations,  and bankruptcy. Specialized service providers have started to offer solutions to address these specific requirements.

The  public  and  pseudonymous  nature  of  crypto  usage  can  enable illicit  activity such  as  money laundering and the financing of terrorism. Pseudonymity also poses a challenge to the 'know your client' and 'know your counterparty' laws of most jurisdictions. The bearer nature of native crypto assets such as Bitcoin makes them useful in ransomware attacks. The data shows that crypto-assets and  stablecoins  are  used  in  the  circumvention  of  capital  controls  and  in  sanctions  evasion.  In oppressive political regimes, this ability of crypto can support the financing of dissidents and also partially  compensate  for  the  financial  exclusion  often  applied  by  such  authorities  to  political

opponents. 25 One way to hide the trace of illicit funds on chain is to cycle them through DeFi solutions such as a decentralized exchange.   The transparency of blockchain technology can also be used to investigate or even prevent illicit activity. 26 Substantial  illicit  flows  also  still  move  through  existing infrastructure, despite significant effort to stop it. 27 Regarding crypto networks, the Financial Asset Task Force (FATF) notes that 'Without proper regulation, virtual assets also risk becoming a safe haven for  the  financial  transactions  of  criminals  and  terrorists.  The  FATF  has    issued  global,  binding standards to prevent the misuse of virtual assets for money laundering and terrorist financing. In recent years, some countries have started to regulate the sector, while others have prohibited virtual assets altogether.' A key pillar of such regulation would be the 'travel rule' (FATF recommendation 16) which is being implemented by a growing number of jurisdictions (FATF, 2023) and which applies to so called 'virtual asset service providers' (VASPs) engaged in virtual asset transfers. VASPs need to obtain  and  disclose  details  pertaining  to  the  sender  and  recipient  of  a  virtual  asset  transfer  to counterpart VASPs or financial institutions, either during the transaction or prior to it (for transfers above USD 1000). The travel rule  aims  at  bringing  the  crypto  industry  in  line  with  the  traditional financial industry's AML/CFT rules. A multitude of questions arise in the practical implementation of the  travel  rule  and  determine  its  effectiveness.  Moreover,  payments  between  two  non-custodial wallets are not directly covered by the travel rule.

Settlement finality is  defined by the CPMI the legally defined moment at which the transfer of an asset or financial instrument, or the discharge of an obligation, is irrevocable and unconditional and not susceptible to being unwound following the bankruptcy or insolvency of a participant. Depending on the technology and design of the crypto-network, operational transfer and final settlement may not coincide, which may lead to settlement risk.

The further evolution of DeFi networks will need to address these challenges, and authorities need to develop  effective  supervision  without  disrupting  the  effective  functioning  of  crypto  networks  as financial market infrastructures. The underlying risks are in principle also present in the traditional financial industry, but have normally been mitigated through experience, investments and regulation.

## 10. Conclusion

Due to their unique architecture, decentralized finance applications running on public crypto networks operate on different time structures than even the most technically advanced traditional counterparts. This architecture also allows novel products such as multi-asset atomic swaps and flash loans. Important features include the elimination of traditional intermediaries, the universality and flexibility of the base ledger, a flattened hierarchy (when desirable), the elimination of expensive and potentially  error-prone  human  decision  making,  public  access,  and  continuous  operation. 28 These features could allow crypto networks to provide financial market infrastructure with unprecedented efficiency.

While some of these features also exist on non-blockchain infrastructure, the combination seems only possible on public and permissionless crypto networks. The neutrality of decentralized infrastructure offers assurances and guarantees which are very different from those on which centralized networks rely on. At the same time, a variety of issues, which over time have been specified and regulated in traditional finance, need further clarification for crypto-platforms (e.g. in the field of preventing illicit payments,  on  settlement  finality  and  enforceability).  Different  crypto  networks  are  suitable  for different types of decentralized finance, having to do with their speed, capacity, reliability, and user experience.  Permissioned  blockchains,  while  offering  some  of  the  advantages,  run  into  the  same organizational issues as existing settlement systems and do not reap all efficiency advantages of public ones.  Importantly, just because DeFi offers a certain flattened design or immediate time structure doesn't mean that market participants will opt for it. Some decentralized exchanges defer settlement to  maximize  liquidity  for  periodic  batch  auctions.  Most  lending  solutions  use  smart  contracts  to achieve  a  single  balance  sheet,  one  that  plays  the  role  of  intermediary,  albeit  an  automated  one governed mostly by code. Indeed, some even allow the owners of their governance token to vote on important  parameters.  Layer-2  solutions,  when  viewed  in  the  context  of  maximum  settlement assurances, offer a sort of deferred net settlement. Thus, the greatest difference between DeFi and traditional solutions is the optionality of single-layer, instant, automated, and peer to peer interaction. Financial engineers are free to deviate from these extremes as they wish.

It will eventually be up to market participants to decide which time structures and product designs are optimal. The optionality of the above features could lead to varied experimentation. Thus, the biggest beneficiaries from the continued improvement of ICT may end up being financial engineers who will someday get to design new products that are inspired by what can be and unburdened by what has been.

## Literature

Ackerer, Damien, Julien Hugonnier, and Urban J. Jermann (2023), ' Perpetual Futures Pricing ' The Wharton School Research Paper. https ://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract\_id=4603820

Adams, Hayden et al (2020) 'Uniswap V2 Core', https://app.uniswap.org/whitepaper.pdf

Agur, Itai, German Villegas Bauer, Tommaso Mancini-Griffoli, Maria Soledad Martinez Peria, and Brandon Tan (2025), "Tokenization and Financial Market Inefficiencies", IMF Fintech Notes 2025, https://doi.org/10.5089/9798400298905.063

Amsden, Zachary &amp; many others (2020) 'The Libra Blockchain', https://diem-developerscomponents.netlify.app/papers/the-diem-blockchain/2020-05-26.pdf

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2024), Novel risks, mitigants and uncertainties with permissionless distributed ledger technologies,  Working Paper 44

Bindseil, U. and Pantelopoulos, G (2022), 'A brief history of payment netting and settlement', IBF Paper Series, No. 02-22, IBF - Institut fr Bank- und Finanzgeschichte e.V., Frankfurt a.M.

Bindseil, U., P. Papsdorf, Schaaf, J. (2022), The encrypted threat: Bitcoin's social cost and regulatory responses, SUERF Policy Note 262.

Bindseil U. and J. Schaaf (2024), The distributional consequences of Bitcoin, SSRN.

Carter, Nic (2024), 'Stablecoins: The Emerging Market Story.' https://castleisland.vc/writing/stablecoins-the-emerging-market-story/

Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructure (2024). 'Tokenisation in the context of money and other assets: concepts and implications for central banks - Report to the G20', BIS.

Ethereum Foundation (2023) 'GASPER', https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/consensusmechanisms/pos/gasper/

FATF (2023), 'Targeted update on the implementation of the FATF standards on virtual assets and virtual asset service providers', https://www.fatf-gafi.org/content/fatfgafi/en/publications/Fatfrecommendations/targeted-update-virtual-assets-vasps-2023.html

Griffin, John &amp; Mei, Kevin (2024) 'How Do Crypto Flows Finance Slavery? The Economics of Pig Butchering'.  https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract\_id=4742235

Huberman, Gur &amp; Leshno, Jacob &amp; Moallemi, Ciamac (2017)  'Monopoly Without a Monopolist: An Economic Analysis of the Bitcoin Payment System' The review of Economic Studies, https://academic.oup.com/restud/article/88/6/3011/6169547

Kitziler et al (2023) 'Disentangling Decentralized Finance (DeFi) Compositions' https://dl.acm.org/doi/full/10.1145/3532857

Lewis-Pye, Andrew and Roughgarden, Tim (2024) 'Permissionless Consensus', https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.14701

Malekan, Omid (2022) 'Re-Architecting Trust, The Curse of History and the Crypto Cure for Money, Markets and Platforms.' BookBaby

Monrat et al (2020) 'Performance Evaluation of Permissioned Blockchain Platforms'

Milionis , Jason and Moallem, Ciamac C. and Roughgarden, Tim and Lee Zhang, Anthony (2022) 'Automated Market Making and Loss-Versus-Rebalancing)

https://arxiv.org/pdf/2208.06046

Nakamoto, Satoshi (2008) 'Bitcoin: A Peer to Peer Electronic Cash System', https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf

Nuzzi, Lucas and Waters, Kyle and Andrade, Matias (2024) 'Breaking BFT: Quantifying the Cost to Attack Bitcoin and Ethereum.' https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract\_id=4727999

Raspa, Scott (2022), 'Web3 is the future of payments',  BlogPost - Defi, Finextra. 13 July 2022.

Ved, Tanay and Cabieses, Matas (2024) 'A Data Driven Update on Stablecoins:' https://coinmetrics.substack.com/p/state-of-the-network-issue-286